Add Distinct Colors Editorial (#1988)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: solutions/cses-1139.mdx

 as we iterate.

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal O(N\log N)$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>
```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
 
using namespace std;
#define pb push_back

struct BIT {
		vector<int> bit;
		int n;
		BIT(int n) {
				this->n = n + 1;
				bit.resize(n+1);
		}
		int sum(int r) {
				r++;
				int ret = 0;
				while (r > 0) {
						ret += bit[r];
						r -= r & -r;
				}
				return ret;
		}
		void update(int idx, int v) {
				idx++;
				while (idx < n) {
						bit[idx] += v;
						idx += idx & -idx;
				}
		}
};

const int MAXN = 2e5+1;

//Euler Tour, color of each node, answer for each node, left endpoint of each node(as explained in editorial)
int tour[MAXN], color[MAXN], answer[MAXN], lend[MAXN];

vector<int> adj[MAXN];
int idx = 0;

void dfs(int u, int par = 0){
	lend[u] = idx;
	for(int n : adj[u]){
		if(n == par) continue;
		dfs(n, u);
	}
	tour[idx] = u; idx++;
}

int main(){
	ios_base::sync_with_stdio(false); cin.tie(0);
	int N, u, v; cin >> N;
	for(int i = 1; i <= N; i++){
		cin >> color[i];
	}
	for(int i = 0; i < N-1; i++){
		cin >> u >> v;
		adj[u].pb(v);
		adj[v].pb(u);
	}
	dfs(1);
	BIT bit(N);
	map<int, int> last;

> // This map stores the rightmost occurrence of each color

Reviewer: this comment's indentation seems a bit hecked up

	for(int i = 0; i < N; i++){
		if(last.count(color[tour[i]])){ //If we ever considered the color of tour[i]
			bit.update(last[color[tour[i]]], -1);

> 			//The last time the color of tour[i] appeared, we make that 0 again

Reviewer: bruh can you like put the comments before the code segment they belong to

Reviewer: also space after the `//`

		}

> 		last[color[tour[i]]] = i; //We change the last occurrence of the color of tour[i]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		last[color[tour[i]]] = i;  // We change the last occurrence of the color of tour[i]
```

> 		bit.update(i, 1); //We reflect that change in our BIT

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		bit.update(i, 1);  // We reflect that change in our BIT
```

---
id: cses-1139
source: CSES
title: Distinct Colors
author: Timothy Gao
---

## Editorial

> Let us consider the Euler Tour of the tree. We flatten the tree into an array, where each node corresponds to a range in this array. Now, we are essentially tasked the find the number of distinct values in a range $N$ times(once for each node).

Reviewer 2: > we are essentially tasked the find

What does this mean? Also, formatting

> There are a variety of ways to approach the problem from here.

Reviewer 2: Take out this line - it's redundant

Reviewer 2: Also, you say this but only list 1 solution

Author: I'm going to add 2 more approaches in later pull requests.

Author: (Small to Large Merging and Mo's Algorithm)

Reviewer 3: > (Small to Large Merging and Mo's Algorithm)

for small to large merging, link the module (the solution is already there)

> **Solution: BIT**

Reviewer 2: Make this a heading 3 instead

Author: how do i do this?

One such solution is with a binary indexed tree. Let us consider iterating through the Euler tour array from left to right. 

> When we consider a node at index $i$ in the Euler tour array, its subtree range will be $[j, i]$, where $j<=i$.

Reviewer 2: Use \leq instead of <=. Also, what is j?

Author: I'm not that familiar with latex how do I use that?

Reviewer 3: $j\leq i$

Now, let's focus on a single color. Notice that if there are multiple colors $c$ to the left of a certain index $i$,
only $c$'s most rightmost occurrence is relevant. This is because any non-rightmost occurrence of $c$
from $i$ must include the rightmost occurrence of $c$. More formally, 
any segment $[l, r]$ must contains $i$ if $l <= i <= r$. 

> With this observation, we can essentially reduce the distinct colors queries to a simple range query. As we iterate through the Euler Tour from left to right, mark the current index(in the BIT) as 1, and if the color of the node at the current index has occurred before, make it 0 in the BIT. We can find the solution to every node by doing a sum query

Reviewer 2: Formatting

Author: which part?

Reviewer 2: There are spaces and punctuation marks missing

Author: As confirmed by grammarly, there are no punctuation/spaces errors. I'm not sure where you're talking about.

 as we iterate.

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal O(N\log N)$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>
```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
 
using namespace std;
#define pb push_back

struct BIT {
		vector<int> bit;
		int n;
		BIT(int n) {
				this->n = n + 1;
				bit.resize(n+1);
		}
		int sum(int r) {
				r++;
				int ret = 0;
				while (r > 0) {
						ret += bit[r];
						r -= r & -r;
				}
				return ret;
		}
		void update(int idx, int v) {
				idx++;
				while (idx < n) {
						bit[idx] += v;
						idx += idx & -idx;
				}
		}
};

const int MAXN = 2e5+1;

// Euler Tour, color of each node, answer for each node, left endpoint of each node(as explained in editorial)
int tour[MAXN], color[MAXN], answer[MAXN], lend[MAXN];

vector<int> adj[MAXN];
int idx = 0;

> void dfs(int u, int par = 0){

Reviewer 4: brace style is not consisten w/ bit template

Author: wait wut does this mean?

Author: fixed

---
id: cses-1139
source: CSES
title: Distinct Colors
author: Timothy Gao
---

## Solution 1 - Small to Large Merging

See [here](/plat/merging#merging-data-structures).

## Solution 2 - PURS

> Let us consider the Euler Tour of the tree. We flatten the tree into an array, where each node corresponds to a range in this array. Now, we are essentially tasked to find the number of distinct values in a range $N$ times (once for each node).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Let us consider the Euler Tour of the tree. If we flatten the tree into an array, where each node corresponds to a range in this array, then we are essentially tasked to find the number of distinct values in a range $N$ times (once for each node).
```

Let us consider iterating through the Euler Tour array from left to right. 
When we consider a node at index $i$ in the Euler Tour array, its subtree range will be $[j, i]$, where $j\leq i$.
Now, let's focus on a single color. Notice that if there are multiple colors $c$ to the left of a certain index $i$, only $c$'s most rightmost occurrence is relevant. We only want to count $c$ once so we choose to only count the most rightmost occurence. This is because any non-rightmost occurrence of $c$
from $i$ must include the rightmost occurrence of $c$. More formally, 
any segment $[l, r]$ must contains $i$ if $l <= i <= r$. 

> With this observation, we can essentially reduce the distinct colors queries to a simple range query. As we iterate through the Euler Tour from left to right, mark the current index (in the BIT) as $1$, and if the color of the node at the current index has occurred before, make it $0$ in the BIT. We can find the solution to every node by doing a sum query

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
With this observation, we can reduce the distinct colors queries to a simple range query. As we iterate through the Euler Tour from left to right, mark the current index (in the BIT) as $1$. If the color of the node at the current index has occurred before, make it $0$ in the BIT. We can find the solution to every node by doing a sum query
```

 as we iterate.

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal O(N\log N)$

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
 
using namespace std;
#define pb push_back

> struct BIT {

Reviewer 6: everything here is tabbed twice?

		vector<int> bit;
		int n;
		BIT(int n) {
				this->n = n + 1;
				bit.resize(n+1);
		}
		int sum(int r) {
				r++;
				int ret = 0;
				while (r > 0) {
						ret += bit[r];
						r -= r & -r;
				}
				return ret;
		}
		void update(int idx, int v) {
				idx++;
				while (idx < n) {
						bit[idx] += v;
						idx += idx & -idx;
				}
		}
};

const int MAXN = 2e5 + 1;

// Euler Tour, color of each node, answer for each node, left endpoint of each node (as explained in editorial)
int tour[MAXN], color[MAXN], answer[MAXN], lend[MAXN];

vector<int> adj[MAXN];
int idx = 0;

void dfs(int u, int par = 0) {
	lend[u] = idx;
	for (int n : adj[u]) {
		if (n == par) continue;
		dfs(n, u);
	}
	tour[idx] = u; idx++;
}

int main() {
	ios_base::sync_with_stdio(false); cin.tie(0);
	int N, u, v; cin >> N;
	for (int i = 1; i <= N; i++) {
		cin >> color[i];
	}
	for (int i = 0; i < N - 1; i++) {
		cin >> u >> v;
		adj[u].pb(v);
		adj[v].pb(u);
	}
	dfs(1);
	BIT bit(N);

> 	map<int, int> last;
> 	// This map stores the rightmost occurrence of each color

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion

	// This map stores the rightmost occurrence of each color
	map<int, int> last;
```

---
id: cses-1139
source: CSES
title: Distinct Colors
author: Timothy Gao
---

## Editorial

> Let us consider the Euler Tour of the tree. We flatten the tree into an arary, where each node corresponds to a range 

Reviewer 4: "arary"

Author: lmao oops

## Solution 2 - PURS

Let us consider the Euler Tour of the tree. We flatten the tree into an array, where each node corresponds to a range in this array. Now, we are essentially tasked to find the number of distinct values in a range $N$ times (once for each node).

Let us consider iterating through the Euler Tour array from left to right. 
When we consider a node at index $i$ in the Euler Tour array, its subtree range will be $[j, i]$, where $j\leq i$.
Now, let's focus on a single color. Notice that if there are multiple colors $c$ to the left of a certain index $i$,

> only $c$'s most rightmost occurrence is relevant. This is because any non-rightmost occurrence of $c$

Reviewer 3: capitalize "only"

Reviewer 3: ~~did grammarly not catch this?~~

Reviewer 3: maybe you want to mention that "we only want to count $c$ once so we can choose to only count the most rightmost occurence"

Reviewer 6: "only" is not the start of a new sentence 👀

Reviewer 3: oops

from $i$ must include the rightmost occurrence of $c$. More formally, 

> any segment $[l, r]$ must contains $i$ if $l <= i <= r$. 

Reviewer 3: > More formally, 
any segment $[l, r]$ must contains $i$ if $l <= i <= r$. 

uh, is this necessary

Author: doesn't hurt

Reviewer 3: grammar

any segment $[l, r]$ must contains $i$ if $l <= i <= r$. 

With this observation, we can essentially reduce the distinct colors queries to a simple range query. As we iterate
 through the Euler Tour from left to right, mark the current index(in the BIT) as 1, and if the color of the node at current index 
 has occured before, make it 0 in the BIT(by updating with -1). We can find the solution to every node by doing a sum query
 as we iterate.

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal O(N\log N)$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>
```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
 
using namespace std;
#define pb push_back

struct BIT {
		vector<int> bit;
		int n;
		BIT(int n) {
				this->n = n + 1;
				bit.resize(n+1);
		}
		int sum(int r) {
				r++;
				int ret = 0;
				while (r > 0) {
						ret += bit[r];
						r -= r & -r;
				}
				return ret;
		}
		void update(int idx, int v) {
				idx++;
				while (idx < n) {
						bit[idx] += v;
						idx += idx & -idx;
				}
		}
};

> const int maxn = 2e5+1;

Reviewer: ok uh just one final thing
think constants should be in all caps?

from $i$ must include the right most occurance of $c$. If that's confusing to you, we're essentially saying that 
any segment $[l, r]$ must contains $i$ if $l <= i <= r$. 

With this observation, we can essentially reduce the distinct colors queries to a simple range query. As we iterate
 through the euler tour from left to right, mark the current index as 1, and if the color of the node at current index 
 has occured before, make it 0 in the BIT(by updating with -1). We can find the solution to every node by doing a sum query
 as we iterate.

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal O(N\log N)$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>
```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
 
using namespace std;
 
typedef pair<int, int> pii;
 
#define pb push_back
 
#define f first
#define s second

template <typename T>
struct BIT {
		vector<T> bit;
		int n;
		BIT(int n) {
				this->n = n + 1;
				bit.resize(n+1);
		}
		T sum(int r) {
				r++;
				T ret = 0;
				while (r > 0) {
						ret += bit[r];
						r -= r & -r;
				}
				return ret;
		}
		void update(int idx, T v) {
				idx++;
				while (idx < n) {
						bit[idx] += v;
						idx += idx & -idx;
				}
		}
};

> const int maxn = 2e5+69;

Reviewer: just `2e5` or `2e5 + 1` should work right
if so can you do that

int tour[maxn], color[maxn], answer[maxn], lend[maxn];

> //euler tour, color of each node, answer for each node, left endpoint of each node(as explained in editorial)

Reviewer: put this comment above the arrays?

> //range of each color, [l,r]

Reviewer: i don't get this comment, could you explain a bit more?

Author: oops, I originally had another array but deleted it later. will remove

vector<int> adj[maxn];
int idx = 0;

void dfs(int u, int par = 0){
	lend[u] = idx;
	for(int n : adj[u]){
		if(n == par) continue;
		dfs(n, u);
	}
	tour[idx] = u; idx++;
}

int main(){
	ios_base::sync_with_stdio(false); cin.tie(0);
	int N, u, v; cin >> N;
	for(int i = 1; i<=N; i++){
		cin >> color[i];
	}
	for(int i = 0; i<N-1; i++){
		cin >> u >> v;
		adj[u].pb(v);
		adj[v].pb(u);
	}
	dfs(1);
	BIT<int> bit(N);
	map<int, int> last;

> 	//this map stores the rightmost(most recent) occurance of each color

Reviewer: also spaces after each comment, it looks so much nicer

Reviewer: wait no not like this
i mean `// this is a comment`, not `//this is a comment`

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
// This map stores the rightmost occurance of each color
```

	for(int i = 0; i<N; i++){
		if(last.count(color[tour[i]])){ //if we ever considered the color of tour[i]
			bit.update(last[color[tour[i]]], -1);
			//the last time the color of tour[i] appeared, we make that 0 again
		}
		last[color[tour[i]]] = i; //we change the last occurance of the color of tour[i]
		bit.update(i, 1); //we reflect that change in our BIT
		answer[tour[i]] = bit.sum(i) - bit.sum(lend[tour[i]] - 1);
		//the answer for tour[i]'s node is simply the sum of 1s in its contiguous subinterval in the euler tour
	}
	for(int i = 1; i<=N; i++){
		cout << answer[i] << " ";
	}

> 	return 0;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: wait is this is good practice or smth? I was always under the presumption that return 0 was necessary?

Reviewer: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/4138649/why-is-return-0-optional

Reviewer 7: `return 0;` isn't necessary to compilation, lol. Keeping `return 0;` is fine, nonetheless.

Author: oh ok cool

---
id: cses-1139
source: CSES
title: Distinct Colors
author: Timothy Gao
---

## Editorial

Let us consider the euler tour of the tree. We flatten the tree into an arary, where each node corresponds to a range 

> in this array. Now, we are essentially tasked the find the number of distinct values in a range $N$ times(for each node).

Author: well the problem is similar but it asks for in a subtree(hence euler tour).

There are a variety of ways to approach the problem from here.

**Solution 1: PURS**

One such solution is with a PURS structure. Let us consider iterating through the euler tour array from left to right. 
When we consider a node at index i in the euler tour array, it will have it's subtree range be $[j, i]$, where $j<=i$.
Now, let's focus on a single color. Notice that if there are multiple of color $c$ to the left of a certain index $i$,

> we really only care about $c$'s most recent(rightmost) occurance. This is because any none-rightmost occurance of $c$

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
only $c$'s most rightmost occurance is relevant. This is because any non-rightmost occurance of $c$
```

> from $i$ must include the right most occurance of $c$. If that's confusing to you, we're essentially saying that 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
from $i$ must include the rightmost occurance of $c$. More formally, 
```

any segment $[l, r]$ must contains $i$ if $l <= i <= r$. 

With this observation, we can essentially reduce the distinct colors queries to a simple range query. As we iterate

>  through the euler tour from left to right, mark the current index as 1, and if the color of the node at current index 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
through the euler tour from left to right, mark the current index as 1, and if the color of the node at the current index 
```
When you said "mark the current index as 1" are you sure you didn't mean "mark the current index as $i$" (I didn't actually read the problem :laughing: so idk).

>  has occured before, make it 0 in the BIT(by updating with -1). We can find the solution to every node by doing a sum query

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
has occured before, make it 0 in the BIT. We can find the solution to every node by doing a sum query
```

 as we iterate.

**Time Complexity:** $\mathcal O(N\log N)$

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>
```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
 
using namespace std;
 

> typedef pair<int, int> pii;

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
using pi = pair<int, int>;
```
This one is optional, but preferred.

 
#define pb push_back
 
#define f first
#define s second

> template <typename T>

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```
According to [this](https://github.com/cpinitiative/usaco-guide/issues/806), `template <typename T> isn't allowed for this sol, so please modify this accordingly :+1:

Author: k thx

struct BIT {
		vector<T> bit;
		int n;
		BIT(int n) {
				this->n = n + 1;
				bit.resize(n+1);
		}
		T sum(int r) {
				r++;
				T ret = 0;
				while (r > 0) {
						ret += bit[r];
						r -= r & -r;
				}
				return ret;
		}
		void update(int idx, T v) {
				idx++;
				while (idx < n) {
						bit[idx] += v;
						idx += idx & -idx;
				}
		}
};

const int maxn = 2e5+6;
int tour[maxn], color[maxn], answer[maxn], lend[maxn];
//euler tour, color of each node, answer for each node, left endpoint of each node(as explained in editorial)
vector<int> adj[maxn];
int idx = 0;

void dfs(int u, int par = 0){
	lend[u] = idx;
	for(int n : adj[u]){
		if(n == par) continue;
		dfs(n, u);
	}
	tour[idx] = u; idx++;
}

int main(){
	ios_base::sync_with_stdio(false); cin.tie(0);

> 	int N, u, v; cin >> N;

Reviewer 7: You should make your variable names consistent, so rather than naming the number of nodes as `N` name it as `n` since `u` and `v` are lowercase lol.

Author: hmm. N is a constant while u and v are not though.

> 	for(int i = 1; i<=N; i++){

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
	for(int i = 1; i <= N; i++){
```
Inconsistent spacing...

		cin >> color[i];
	}

> 	for(int i = 0; i<N-1; i++){

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
	for(int i = 0; i < N-1; i++){
```
Same here

		cin >> u >> v;
		adj[u].pb(v);
		adj[v].pb(u);
	}
	dfs(1);
	BIT<int> bit(N);
	map<int, int> last;
	//this map stores the rightmost(most recent) occurance of each color

> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```
Unnecessary

> 	for(int i = 0; i<N; i++){

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
	for(int i = 0; i < N; i++){
```
Here too.

> 		if(last.count(color[tour[i]])){ //if we ever considered the color of tour[i]

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
		if(last.count(color[tour[i]])){ // Check if we ever considered the color of tour[i]
```

> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```
This is unnecessary

			bit.update(last[color[tour[i]]], -1);

> 			//the last time the color of tour[i] appeared, we make that 0 again

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
			// We update the BIT at the index of the last occurrence of tour[i].
```

> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```
Same here

		}

> 		last[color[tour[i]]] = i; //we change the last occurance of the color of tour[i]

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
		last[color[tour[i]]] = i; // We update the last occurance of the color of tour[i]
```

> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```
Same here.

> 		bit.update(i, 1); //we reflect that change in our BIT

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
		bit.update(i, 1); // We reflect that change in our BIT
```

Author: so for grammar edits like these feel free to edit the commit directly if u can, thanks

> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```
Same here

		answer[tour[i]] = bit.sum(i) - bit.sum(lend[tour[i]] - 1);

> 		//the answer for tour[i]'s node is simply the sum of 1s in its contiguous subinterval in the euler tour

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
		// The answer for tour[i]'s node is simply the sum of 1s in its contiguous subinterval in the euler tour
```

> 

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
```
Same here

	}

> 	for(int i = 1; i<=N; i++){

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
	for(int i = 1; i <= N; i++){
```
Again, here.

		}
};

> const int maxn = 2e5+6;

Reviewer: why +6 now lmao

Author: lol y not

Reviewer: because when most people look at code they always assume every bit of code is necessary
the problem with this is looking at the +6, they'll assume it's necessary and then be confused about why it is so

Author: I mean if they're reading a gold editorial they should be able to infer that it's arbitrary, but for formality ill change it anyways. Just feel that this is a bit nitpicky.

int tour[maxn], color[maxn], answer[maxn], lend[maxn];

> //euler tour, color of each node, answer for each node, left endpoint of each node(as explained in editorial)

Reviewer: again, put this comment above the array declarations

Author: personally find this unnecessary?

Reviewer: it would be way clearer
you don't see a paper with the title at the bottom or anything like that
